RFC: Slot null rendering (#18949)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/convergence/slot-null-rendering.md

# RFC: Slot null rendering refactoring

---

_@bsunderhus_

## Summary

This RFC proposes a solution for a recurring problem involving slots with no `children` property into 2 steps:

> 1. `getSlots` should stop verifying null rendering by the existence of the property `children`

Reviewer: Maybe this should be obvious (or will become obvious after reading the rest of the RFC), but on initial reading it's not clear to me what "verifying null rendering" means. So I wonder if there's a better way to word that.

2. Since some slots have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered (or not) even presenting default props

## Background

`getSlots` is a method that iterates over `ObjectShorthandProps` (_`shorthands`_) declarations and converts them to something that can be rendered by React.

> In the case where one _shorthand_ declares a native element (e.g: `"div"`, `"input"`) a verification is made to decide if this declaration will be rendered into something or not (null rendering). This verification will only allow native elements to be rendered if this element presents `children` as property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case where one _shorthand_ declares a native element (e.g: `"div"`, `"input"`) it will only be rendered if this element has `children` as a property.
```

```tsx
// react-utilities/src/compose/getSlots.ts
// ....
if (typeof slot === 'string' && children === undefined) {
  slot = nullRender;
}
```

## Problem statement

> The verification of only allowing native elements to be rendered if this element present `children` as property breaks in some edge cases

Reviewer: Small wording thing
```suggestion
The verification of only allowing native elements to be rendered if a `children` property is provided breaks in some edge cases.
```

### [Empty Elements]

> The `Input` component is a good case example of that as [reported](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/18642#issuecomment-871677964) by @ecraig12345, since the native element `input` is an [Empty Element], it cannot take any children, and still need to be rendered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Input` component is a good case example of that as [reported](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/18642#issuecomment-871677964) by @ecraig12345, since the native element `input` is an [Empty Element], it cannot have any children, and still needs to be rendered.
```

Right now for input case this is the solution to avoid `children = undefined` problem:

> ```tsx

Reviewer 2: I only see this on the preview: 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20744592/125945608-5ed96ca5-b297-4fb9-a1e0-d0195af0476c.png)

Makes sense to display the code too directly in md

    })
  };
  const { slots, slotProps } = getSlots(state, ['input']);
  delete slotProps.input.children; // 🚨 input can't have children

  return (
    <slots.root {...slotProps.root}>
      <slots.input {...slotProps.input} />
    </slots.root>
  );
}
```
[Live Example](https://stackblitz.com/edit/react-ts-wwguyp?file=Input.tsx)

### Slot as a parent for other slots

This edge case has been seen in different converged components ([`CompoundButton`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/packages/react-button/src/components/CompoundButton/renderCompoundButton.tsx#L18), [`AccordionHeader`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/packages/react-accordion/src/components/AccordionHeader/renderAccordionHeader.tsx#L15))

The problem is that using a slot as parent for other slots means overriding `children` props, so `children` is not declared in the moment `resolveShorthand` is invoked but in the moment that the slot will be rendered.

```tsx
export function Component(props) {
  const state = {
    components: {
      button: 'button',
      icon: 'i'
    },
    button: resolveShorthand(props.button, {

>       children: React.Fragment // 🚨 getSlots requires children

Reviewer 2: Makes more sense to have this as some more meaningful chldren than a fragment in this example IMO

Author: It could be anything but undefined, I'll update it 👍🏼

    }),
    icon: resolveShorthand(props.icon)
  };

  const { slots, slotProps } = getSlots(state, ['input']);

  return (
    <slots.root {...slotProps.root}>
      <slots.button {...slotProps.button}>
        <slots.icon {...slotProps.icon} />
      </slots.button>
    </slots.root>
  );
}
```
[Live Example](https://stackblitz.com/edit/react-ts-wwguyp?file=SlotAsParent.tsx)

### Native elements without children

e.g: An Icon that doesn't have children `<i class="icon"/>` (this cases is hypothetical, but quite possible, as we cannot verify it in converged components)

## Detailed Design or Proposal

Both options here proposed by the end are equivalent, the only difference is the impact on `ObjectShorthandProps` interface

> ### Option 1: Make `shorthands` optional

Reviewer: This might also be more obvious to people familiar with the helpers, but where is this `shorthands` defined?

Author: It is actually defined in the [Background](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/8eb711e7e07020e178ba1e62722326450433cc3a/rfcs/convergence/slot-null-rendering.md#background)

> getSlots is a method that iterates over ObjectShorthandProps (shorthands) declarations and converts them to something that can be rendered by React.

I'll try to make it more explicit!

This solves this problem by verifying if the shorthand is `undefined` or not.
By verifying if shorthand is `undefined` we can opt for null rendering without compromising the cases which native slots don't have children

- `getSlots` should stop verifying null rendering by the existence of the property `children`, instead depending on the existence of the shorthand itself

```tsx

> // react-utilities/src/compose/getSlots.ts

Reviewer: For those less familiar with the code, can you specify what function this is inside of?

// ....
if (typedState[name] === undefined) {
  slots[name] = nullRender;
  continue;
}
```

- Since some slots may have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered even presenting default props

```diff
export function resolveShorthand(
  value,
  defaultProps,
+  {optional = true}
+) {
+  // verify if shorthand is undefined

> +  if (value === null || (value === undefined && optional)) {

Reviewer 2: what is the difference between null and undefined+optional ?

Author: receiving `null` should always make a slot `null render` (as discussed), in the case of `undefined` that would only be true if the component is optional. The idea is to use `undefined` the same way as React does for `props`, where you can have a default case.

Reviewer 2: Yup can you please state that as part of Option 1 ? The only sign of this distinction is in the code example

Author: As this is equivalent both in Option 1 and 2 I'll add somewhere else

+    return undefined;
+  }
}
```

The problem with this approach is that the shorthand signature now will carry with it an `undefined` value, making overrides a little less elegant:

```ts
export const CustomAccordionHeader = React.forwardRef<HTMLElement, AccordionHeaderProps>((props, ref) => {
  const state = useAccordionHeader(props, ref);

  if (state.icon) {
    state.icon.onClick = () => {
      /**
       * this is an override,
       * if this was a hook than it would need
       * to be declared before the conditional
       **/
    };
  }

  useAccordionHeaderStyles(state);
  return renderAccordionHeader(state);
});
```

In cases where we simply want to ensure that the slot should be rendered even when `shorthand` is `undefined` than `{optional: false}` should be provided

```ts
export const useState = (props, ref) => {
  return {
    ...props,
    slot1: resolveShorthand(props.slot1), // undefined
    slot2: resolveShorthand(props.slot2, {}, { optional: false }), // {}
  };
};
```

### Option 2: Symbol for null rendering

> This solves this problem by verifying if the shorthand has a special symbol or not.

Reviewer: Can you include a demo of calling the API with the special symbol?

Author: The special symbol would only be used inside the methods declared to create `shorthands` and `slots`, meaning the methods `resolveShorthand` and `getSlots` from `react-utilities`, it should not leak for the component development itself.

# RFC: Slot null rendering refactoring

---

_@bsunderhus_

## Summary

`null rendering` is the process of making a `slot` render nothing. This term will be used thoroughly in this RFC.

This RFC proposes a solution for a recurring problem involving slots with no `children` property into 2 steps:

> 1. `getSlots` should stop verifying null rendering (verifying if a slot should of not be rendered) by the existence of the property `children`

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
1. `getSlots` should stop verifying null rendering (verifying if a slot should not be rendered) by the existence of the `children` property.
```

> 2. Since some slots have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered (or not) even presenting default props

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
2. Since some slots have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered (or not) even when presented with default props.
```

The behavior for `null rendering` should be described as: receiving `null` should always make a slot `null render` (although in some cases this might even break the component), in the case of `undefined` that would only be true if the component is optional. The idea is to use `undefined` the same way as React does for props, where you can have a default case.

## Background

`shorthand` is what is passed by component properties, they are referred by the type `ShorthandProps` and eventually converted to `ObjectShorthandProps` by `resolveShorthand` method.

```tsx
export type ShorthandProps<Props = {}> =
  | React.ReactChild
  | React.ReactNodeArray
  | React.ReactPortal
  | number
  | null
  | undefined
  | ObjectShorthandProps<Props>;
```

`getSlots` is a method that iterates over `ObjectShorthandProps` (_shorthands_ that were converted during `resolveShorthand` method) declarations and converts them to something that can be rendered by React.

In the case where one _shorthand_ declares a native element (e.g: `"div"`, `"input"`) it will only be rendered if this element has `children` as a property.

> This is done by `getSlots` method, which is invoke by the rendering function of a component

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
This is done by `getSlots` method, which is invoked by the rendering function of a component.
```

The problem is that using a slot as parent for other slots means overriding `children` props, so `children` is not declared in the moment `resolveShorthand` is invoked but in the moment that the slot will be rendered.

```tsx
export function Component(props) {
  const state = {
    components: {
      button: 'button',
      icon: 'i',
    },
    button: resolveShorthand(props.button, {
      children: React.Fragment, // 🚨 getSlots requires children
    }),
    icon: resolveShorthand(props.icon),
  };

  const { slots, slotProps } = getSlots(state, ['input']);

  return (
    <slots.root {...slotProps.root}>
      <slots.button {...slotProps.button}>
        <slots.icon {...slotProps.icon} />
      </slots.button>
    </slots.root>
  );
}
```

[Live Example](https://stackblitz.com/edit/react-ts-wwguyp?file=SlotAsParent.tsx)

### Native elements without children

> e.g: An Icon that doesn't have children `<i class="icon"/>` (this cases is hypothetical, but quite possible, as we cannot verify it in converged components)

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
e.g: An Icon that doesn't have children `<i class="icon"/>` (this case is hypothetical, but quite possible, as we cannot verify it in converged components).
```

## Detailed Design or Proposal

Both options here proposed by the end are equivalent, the only difference is the impact on `ObjectShorthandProps` interface

### Option 1: Make `shorthands` optional

This solves this problem by verifying if the shorthand is `undefined` or not.
By verifying if shorthand is `undefined` we can opt for null rendering without compromising the cases which native slots don't have children

- `getSlots` should stop verifying null rendering by the existence of the property `children`, instead depending on the existence of the shorthand itself

```tsx
// react-utilities/src/compose/getSlots.ts
function getSlots(state, slotNames) {
  // ...
  if (state[name] === undefined) {
    slots[name] = nullRender;
    continue;
  }
  // ...
}
```

> - Since some slots may have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered even presenting default props

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
- Since some slots may have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered even when presented with default props.
```

```diff
export function resolveShorthand(
  value,
  defaultProps,
+  {optional = true}
+) {
+  // verify if shorthand is undefined
+  if (value === null || (value === undefined && optional)) {
+    return undefined;
+  }
}
```

> The problem with this approach is that the shorthand signature now will carry with it an `undefined` value, making overrides a little less elegant:

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
The problem with this approach is that the shorthand signature will now carry with it an `undefined` value, making overrides a little less elegant:
```

```ts
export const CustomAccordionHeader = React.forwardRef<HTMLElement, AccordionHeaderProps>((props, ref) => {

>   const state = useAccordionHeader(props, ref);
> 
>   if (state.icon) {
>     state.icon.onClick = () => {
>       /**
>        * this is an override,
>        * if this was a hook than it would need
>        * to be declared before the conditional
>        **/
>     };
>   }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  const state = useAccordionHeader(props, ref);
  const iconName = React.useMemo(/* --- */);

  if (state.icon) {
    state.icon.onClick = () => {
      /**
       * this is an override,
       * if this was a hook than it would need
       * to be declared before the conditional
       **/
       // React hooks also cannot be used inside conditions
       state.icon.name = iconName
    };
  }
```

To make it more visible, I suggest to add an example with hooks

  useAccordionHeaderStyles(state);
  return renderAccordionHeader(state);
});
```

> In cases where we simply want to ensure that the slot should be rendered even when `shorthand` is `undefined` than `{optional: false}` should be provided

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
In cases where we simply want to ensure that the slot should be rendered even when `shorthand` is `undefined` then `{optional: false}` should be provided:
```

```ts
export const useState = (props, ref) => {
  return {
    ...props,
    slot1: resolveShorthand(props.slot1), // undefined
    slot2: resolveShorthand(props.slot2, {}, { optional: false }), // {}
  };
};
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Optionally we can modify `resolveShorthand`'s signature, to have second param as config:

```tsx
resolveShorthand(props.slot2, {
  optional: false,
  defaultProps: { "aria-label": "foo" }
});
```

Author: hmmm, there's always the possibility that `optional` is actually a property from the slot, and that would generate a conflict hehehe, but yeah, we could assume that slots can't have `optional` as prop

Reviewer 4: Props in this case will be defined under a separate property (`defaultProps`), so they will not collide 😉

Author: Totally agree with this idea

Reviewer 5: what @layershifter , adding any kind of positional arguments makes API less readable/hard to maintain/brittle to breaking changes

> ### Option 2: Symbol for null rendering

Reviewer 6: I like the idea of option 2, but why not use `null` as the indicator of a slot that shouldn't be rendered?

The two cases are:
1. **A slot that should only be rendered if the user provides content.** For example, Checkbox's `label` slot. In this case, the defaultProps argument to resolveShorthand could be null:
```ts
label: resolveShorthand(props.label, null),
```

If props.label is defined, that'd override the `null` default:
```jsx
<Checkbox label="Example" />
```

2. **A slot that should always be rendered by default, even if the user doesn't provide content.** In that case, the defaultProps argument would be non-null (an object with defaults, or an empty object `{}` if there are no additional defaults). For example, Checkbox's `input` slot:
```ts
input: resolveShorthand(props.input, { type: 'checkbox' }),
```

The user could override and prevent rendering the slot by passing null. This doesn't make sense in the case of Checkbox, but just as a demo:
```jsx
<Checkbox input={null} />
```

Author: That is a great alternative instead of a third argument! I'll add it to the RFC!

Reviewer 6: That's case 2 in my example above. It provides default props `{ type: 'checkbox' }`, but can be explicitly set to `null` by the user: `input={null}`. To implement, `resolveShorthand` would just check the first argument for `null` and return `null` in that case.

There is a case 3, which is a slot that always must be rendered and can never be prevented from rendering (e.g. `root`). In that case, we'd simply not include `null` in the possible type for that slot.

```ts
alwaysRenderedSlot: React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement>;
optionallyRenderedSlot: React.HTMLAttributes<HTMLElement> | null;
```

This solves this problem by verifying if the shorthand has a special symbol or not.

> By verifying this symbol we can opt for null rendering without compromising the cases which native slots don't have children.

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
By verifying this symbol we can opt for null rendering without compromising the cases in which native slots don't have children.
```

This is very similar to Option 1 approach but without the downside of having undefined as part of `ObjectShorthandProps` interface.

- `getSlots` should stop verifying null rendering by the existence of the property `children`, instead depending on the existence of the symbol

```tsx
// react-utilities/src/compose/getSlots.ts
function getSlots(state, slotNames) {
  // ...
  if (typedState[name][nullRenderSymbol]) {
    slots[name] = nullRender;
    continue;
  }
  // ...
}
```

> - Since some slots may have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered even presenting default props

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
- Since some slots may have default props, verification must be done on shorthand declaration to ensure that those slots will be null rendered even when presented with default props
```

```diff
export function resolveShorthand(
	value,
	defaultProps,
+   { optional = true },
+) {
+  if (value === null || (value === undefined && optional)) {
+    return { [nullRenderSymbol]: true };
+  }
```

The difference with this approach is that the shorthand signature will not carry with it an `undefined` value, making overrides easier:

```ts
export const CustomAccordionHeader = React.forwardRef<HTMLElement, AccordionHeaderProps>((props, ref) => {
  const state = useAccordionHeader(props, ref);
  state.icon.onClick = () => {
    /* ... */
  };
  useAccordionHeaderStyles(state);
  return renderAccordionHeader(state);
});
```

> In cases where we simply want to ensure that the slot should be rendered even when `shorthand` is `undefined` than `{optional: false}` should be provided

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
In cases where we simply want to ensure that the slot should be rendered even when `shorthand` is `undefined` then `{optional: false}` should be provided:
```

```ts
export const useState = (props, ref) => {
  return {
    ...props,
    slot1: resolveShorthand(props.slot1), // undefined
    slot2: resolveShorthand(props.slot2, {}, { optional: false }), // {}
  };
};
```

## Pros and Cons

### Pros

> 1. This takes the responsibility of deciding if a slot might be null rendered out of inner implementation of `getSlot` into the developers hand, by providing a optional way of declaring it

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
1. This takes the responsibility of deciding if a slot might be null rendered out of the inner implementation of `getSlot` and into the developers' hands, by providing an optional way of declaring it.
```

### Cons

> 1. This takes the responsibility of deciding if a slot might be null rendered out of inner implementation of `getSlot` into the developers hand, by providing a optional way of declaring it

Reviewer 3: This is just a copy of the pro above, is that intended?

Author: Yes, it's intentional.  Making shorthand logic more explicit can be considered a `pro` but also a `con` depending on the POV

Reviewer 7: To avoid confusion, as I was also wondering, I would avoid repeating the same phrase and instead go with something like:

```suggestion
1. Same as the pros, depending on the POV
```
